< [Home](/README.md)

# Final Status Report

[Download Supporting Slides](https://github.com/yeela67/SOS-project/raw/master/files/SOSProject.pptx)

## Project Overview
My *Student-Originated Software* project was to build a simple eBook reader.

## Why it is interesting
As an avid reader, I love the convenience of eBooks. I can store hundreds of books on my iPad, and it is so easy to add highlights, search, and add notes to what I am reading. However, I also appreciate good design and typography. In the eBook department, these areas are almost entirely ignored or just badly done. Many other individuals agree, including designer Oliver Reichenstein in his article “Designing for iPad: Reality Check” and John Brownlee in “The Kindle Finally Gets Typography That Doesn't Suck.” The consensus: the standard eReading applications are ugly. Therefore, I decided to work on building my own eBook reader, paying special attention to readability and typography. Eventually, I would also like to add more advanced features including highlighting and note-taking. However, the essence of the eBook reader should be a simple, elegant reading experience.

## Original goals and what I accomplished
My project’s original timeline included a broad three-step plan. The first stage was to research the EPUB format. I would not worry about other popular format such as MOBI or AZW. Instead, I would focus on ePub, learning how to retrieve the important content from the file. After that, I would work on creating a pleasing GUI to display the book’s content. Finally, I would start adding advanced features, including highlights and bookmarks.

My actual accomplishments was the first two steps of my original three-step goal. *Python* was my language of choice, as it has rapid prototyping abilities. I learned EPUB books are simple, self-contained websites using XML/HTML from the wonderful *IBM* article, “Build a Digital Book with EPUB“ by Liza Daly. Using *Beautiful Soup,* I quickly parsed the relevant information. Up until this point, everything went smoothly, and it was a fun time. When I started doing GUI work, however, multiple roadblocks appeared. It took much longer than anticipated, and lead me to scraping step three until after the quarter ends.

GUI work was particularly difficult for me because I only have an iPad, relying on the school computers for a lot of coding activities. I have never done GUI work before, so I assumed downloading the necessary modules would be simple. Unfortunately, it was not. I was repeatedly blocked from getting the needed modules on ADA, the school’s Windows and MAC computers due to not having administrator privileges. I tried downloading *Kali Linux* using *Virtual Box,* but it downloaded a different version of WebKit, a version so new I could not find adequate documentation. I even tried *pythonanywhere.com,* and when I encountered errors I sent a eMail to technical support. Well, the response was their website was only a command line tool, and GUI work was not possible.  

The best solution was to download the *Pythonista 3* application for my iPad. It boasted being the only Python IDE for iOS devices, and it included a built-in WebView to display HTML/CSS/JavaScript. My experience was it opened simple HTML files, but for the long HTML files used in eBooks, they would not render. I finally decided to use the built-in “open in Safari” function, allowing me to open the eBook files in the mobile browser. Although not a long-term solution, I decided I needed to start doing styling for my project. Lastly, I created some simple JavaScript scripts to edit the eBook’s HTML files’ display.

## What I Learned
Throughout the past ten weeks I have learned a lot about creating functional applications. Among them is the difficulty of GUI work, and I understand now why UI/UX designers are specialized. Python’s GUIs are limited, and trying to program on an iPad is not a long term solution. Although I do have a functional application, it is no where near production. It is clunky, and I discovered as my project grew, my code’s style degenerated. I did not anticipate all the frustrations, especially since most of the difficulties were not direct programming, but interacting with other people’s code. On the other hand, I also learned to appreciate the simplicity of the EPUB format. *Beautiful Soup* is a wonderful example of an external module done correctly. It is simple, efficient, and well documented. Using *Beautiful Soup* has given me a great demonstration on how to write readable programs for other developers.

## Final Thoughts
My application is not at the stage I had originally planed by the end of the ten weeks. As I am leaving SOS, I will not have any more scheduled class time to work on the remaining pieces. Although I will not be earning college credit, I will still work on my project in my free time. Future features to be implemented include creating a main menu and a table of contents section. The ability to save multiple books on a bookshelf is also desirable, as well as storing the last reading spot. I have a whole heap of ideas due to my past experience with eBook readers. Now I just need to start slowly adding them into my little application, one by one.
